for most of human history medical
workers sought to treat diseases or cure
them
the rise of vaccinations in the 19th
century enhanced the potential to
prevent people from contracting
illnesses in the first place but only in
recent decades did it become possible to
ensure that a particular disease never
threatens humanity again the story of
smallpox the first and so far the only
disease to be permanently eradicated
from the world shows how disease
eradication can happen and why it is so
difficult to achieve smallpox emerged in
human populations thousands of years ago
as a contagious virus that spread
rapidly primarily through close
face-to-face contact causing fever aches
and rashes it killed up to 30% of its
victims and often left survivors with
lifelong disfiguring scars the
devastating impact of smallpox was so
great that several cultures that
religious deities specifically dedicated
to in the 20th century alone it is
estimated to have killed more than 300
million people worldwide with the
effective deployment of vaccination the
number of cases began to decrease by
seeking out infected individuals high
selenium and vaccinating their contacts
to prevent further transmission
scientists realized that the spread of
the disease could be halted in fact
because smallpox could only survive in
human hosts vaccinating all of an
infected persons potential contacts
would stop the virus dead in its tracks
and eliminated from that region once
this strategy had succeeded in ridding
most industrialized countries from
disease health officials realized that
eradicating it worldwide was within
reach
but this was not an easy process proving
especially difficult in places suffering
from poor infrastructure or civil wars
the eradication effort took decades and
involved millions of people working
together from world leaders and
international organizations to rural
doctors and community workers in India
one of the last strongholds of the
disease health workers visited every one
of the country's 100 million households
to search for cases through this
unprecedented worldwide effort in which
even rival superpowers cooperated
smallpox was finally declared eradicated
in 1980 saving approximately 40 million
lives over the following two decades
there were several factors that made
smallpox an ideal candidate for
eradication first humans are essential
to the smallpox lifecycle so breaking
the chain of human-to-human transmission
causes the virus to die out in contrast
many other pathogens like Ebola or the
bubonic plague can survive in animal
carriers while the bacteria that cause
tetanus can even live in the soil
secondly individuals infected with
smallpox displayed a characteristic rash
making them easy to identify even
without a lab test the lack of such
practical diagnostic tools for diseases
with nonspecific symptoms or that have
long incubation periods such as AIDS
makes their eradication more difficult
third the availability of a smallpox
vaccine that provided immunity for five
to ten years in a single dose meant that
there was an effective intervention to
stop the virus from spreading
and finally the initial success of
several countries in eliminating a
disease within their borders served as a
proof of principle for its eradication
worldwide today the same criteria are
applied to determine whether other
diseases can be similarly eliminated and
even though smallpox remains the only
success story thus far several other
pathogens may be next in line great
progress has been made towards
eradicating guinea worm
disease simply by use of water filters
and vaccinations for polio which
previously disabled hundreds of
thousands of people each year is
estimated to have prevented 13 million
cases of paralysis and 650,000 deaths
since 1988 with a 99 percent drop in
infection since the eradication effort
began one final push is all that is
needed to ensure that polio will never
paralyze another child disease
eradication is one public health effort
that benefits all of humanity and
challenges us to work together as a
global community beyond eliminating
specific diseases eradication programs
benefit local populations by improving
health infrastructure for example
Nigeria recently used facilities and
personnel from their polio eradication
program to effectively control an Ebola
outbreak furthermore globalization and
international travel means that even a
single infection anywhere in the world
can potentially spread to other regions
by helping to protect others we help to
protect ourselves disease eradication is
the ultimate gift we can give to
everyone alive today as well as all
future generations of humanity